\chapter{Depth-First Search}

One important operation in a graph is search.  A useful kind of search
is Depth-First, in which we begin as some start node, marking the node
visited, then we recurse on the neighbours one by one until no more
unvisited neighbours exist.

During a visit, we label each node with a number before visiting its
children and another number after visiting its children.  This number
(called the clock) starts at 1, and is incremented every time a node
receives a label.  The number a node $v$ receives before its children
are visited is called its pre-number ($pre(v)$), and the number that
node receives after its children are visited is called its post-number
($post(v)$).

\begin{theorem}[Parenthesis Theorem]

For nodes $u,v$, the interval between $pre(u)$ and $post(u)$ and the
same interval for $v$ are either:

\begin{itemize}

\item Entirely disjoint
\item The interval of $u$ is completely within the interval of $v$
\item The interval of $v$ is completely within the interval of $u$

\end{itemize}

The name comes from the fact that this is just like properly nested
parentheses.

\end{theorem}

Running a DFS on a graph reveals a tree structure where the start node
is the root.  There are a few interesting classifications of edges in
a DFS:

\begin{enumerate}

\item A \emph{Tree Edge} goes from a parent node to a child node.

\item A \emph{Forward Edge} goes from ancestor to descendant (but not
  parent to child)

\item A \emph{Back Edge} goes from descendant to ancestor

\item A \emph{Cross Edge} goes to a non-ancestor non-descendant

\end{enumerate}

\begin{theorem}
A digraph has a cycle if and only if a DFS reveals a back edge.
\end{theorem}

\begin{proof}

First let us assume there is a back edge.  By definition this is a
descendant linking back to an ancestor, which has already been
visited.  This gives us a cycle.

Next let us assume there is a cycle.  A DFS will visit each node in
the cycle, and as soon as the last edge in the cycle is visited it
will link a descendant to ancestor which is the definition of a back
edge.

\end{proof}
